---
title: "VPN"
mathjax: true
layout: post
category: media
---
<h1>Client-to-site VPNs</h1>

A VPN can be implemented in several topologies. In a client-to-site or remote access topology, the VPN client connects uses the public internet to connect to VPN Gateway, vpn gateway is the vpn enabled router which resides at the edge of the local network. 

Client-to-site VPNs can be configured using a number of protocols such as SSL/TLS, SSTP, LwTP. Most VPN solutions use EAP and AAA/RADIUS architecture to authenticate client devices and users.

When the VPN connection has been established, there are two methods on how the connection is managed or how the VPN connection behaves:

1. Split tunnel: In split tunnel the client will be using the VPN connection to access the remote data or the required service only and the internet traffic goes through the clients device to the client’s ISP directly and the internet traffic doesn’t go through the tunnel.
2. Full Tunnel: In Full tunnel as the name suggest once the tunnel has been created and the VPN connection has been established all the traffic including the internet traffic will go through the VPN tunnel. This is mainly used in all of the corporate networks, in full tunnel mode when the client device gets connected the IP address and the DNS servers for the clients get re-assigned to redirect all the traffic to the defined remote network.

<h2>Clientless VPNs</h2>

Clientless VPNS are the VPN solution that doesn’t require the client device to install VPN client software. To give an example of the clientless VPN, Microsoft’s Remote Desktop Protocol is one of the very common. RDP allows to take control of the device remotely. The devices can also be accessed via an SSH tunnel or via HTML5 using a web browsers all are an example of clientless vpns.

<h2>Site-to-Site VPNs</h2>

VPNs can be also deployed in a site-to-site model to connect two or more private networks, these VPN connection happens over a public network. The site-to-site VPNs can also be called as router to router VPN, here the edge router of the network is connected to another edge router or the VPN gateway over the public internet. In this model which traffic needs to go through the VPN is determined and identified by the edge router and the router makes the decision to forward the traffic. 

